---
title: An improved spelling corrector in Haskell
date: "2009/11/01 11:09:54"
updated: "2009/11/01 11:09:54"
permalink: /blog/2009/11/an_improved_spelling_corrector_in_haskell.html
---
[My previous post](http://www.partario.com/blog/2009/10/a-spelling-corrector-in-haskell.html) came up on the [Haskell Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/9zowr/a_spelling_corrector_in_haskell/) yesterday, and I got some great suggestions for improvements to the program, which [I've checked into GitHub](http://github.com/timrobinson/spell-correct/blob/master/Correct.hs).

* `Map.fromListWith` replaces `List.foldl'` and `Map.insertWith'`. [`fromListWith`](http://www.haskell.org/ghc/docs/latest/html/libraries/containers/Data-Map.html#v%3AfromListWith) appears to be specifically designed for aggregating values that share a common key (in .NET terminology it's the [`GroupBy`](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb534501.aspx) function).

* I'll commonly use a construct like `readFile "big.txt" >>= return . train . lowerWords`, to bind a monad value `readFile "big.txt"` to a function `(train . lowerWords)`, then produce a new monad value with `return`. A shorter way to write this is `fmap (train . lowerWords) (readFile "big.txt")`, or, with an import from Control.Applicative, `(train . lowerWords <$> readFile "big.txt")`.

* You can replace the lambda syntax `(\w -> Map.lookup w nwords)` with an operator section, `('Map.lookup' nwords)`. You might see this more commonly as `(+1)` in place of `(\x -> x + 1)`; it's the same thing. <strong class="alt">Edit:</strong> the challenging Markdown syntax means that you'll have to imagine the single quotes around `Map.lookup` replaced with backticks, `.

I should have realised this at the time, but it didn't occur to me that [you can use full pattern-matching syntax in the right-hand side of a Haskell list comprehension](http://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/exps.html#list-comprehensions). If the match fails on some element then that element is filtered out. We can use this to improve on the Python version of the `edits1` function: whereas the Python version combines its `b[0]` subscripts with an `if b` check, the Haskell version can use pattern matching to do both. We can also use the `inits` and `tails` functions to build substrings instead of brute-force applications of `take` and `drop`.

<pre>
# Python
def edits1(word):
   s = [(word[:i], word[i:]) for i in range(len(word) + 1)]
   deletes    = [a + b[1:] for a, b in s if b]
   transposes = [a + b[1] + b[0] + b[2:] for a, b in s if len(b)&gt;1]
   replaces   = [a + c + b[1:] for a, b in s for c in alphabet if b]
   inserts    = [a + c + b     for a, b in s for c in alphabet]
   return set(deletes + transposes + replaces + inserts)

&gt; -- Haskell
&gt; edits1 word = let s = zip (inits word) (tails word)
&gt;                   deletes    = [ a ++ y     | (a, _:y  ) &lt;- s ]
&gt;                   transposes = [ a ++ y:x:z | (a, x:y:z) &lt;- s ]
&gt;                   replaces   = [ a ++ c:y   | (a, _:y  ) &lt;- s, c &lt;- alphabet ]
&gt;                   inserts    = [ a ++ c:x   | (a, x    ) &lt;- s, c &lt;- alphabet ]
&gt;                in Set.fromList $ concat [ deletes, transposes, replaces, inserts ]
</pre>

The `edits1` function is the densest one in both the Python and Haskell versions. It's the one where the intent of the code was least clear to me when I originally saw it, probably because of the extra clutter in the list comprehensions. In the latest Haskell revision it's more obvious what's going on.

I've consistently used the names `x`, `y` and `z` for the first three parts of the word's suffix. Because they consistently stand for the same thing, any inconsistencies jump out at you when you read the code:

* `a ++ y` stands out because `x` is missing; it's been _deleted_. (`x` isn't even mentioned in the pattern match.)
* `a ++ y:x:z` stands out because `x` and `y` are the wrong way round; we're _transposing_ them
* `a ++ c:y` stands out because we've got `c` instead of `x`; `x` has been _replaced_. (Again, `x` has dropped out of the pattern match.)
* `a ++ c:x` has `c` in front of `x`; it's been _inserted_

After I'd written the first Haskell version I was skeptical. The Python version uses some typical Python idioms, like `if b` for checking for empty strings, using the same syntax for accessing lists and sets, and overloading the `or` operator to look for the first non-empty set, and Haskell doesn't have these same shortcuts. However the latest set of revisions makes the the core algorithm in the Haskell version more readable than the Python equivalent.
